Contrastive Entity Coreference and Disambiguation for Historical Texts

Abhishek Arora1†, Emily Silcock1†, Leander Heldring2,3, Melissa Dell1,2∗
1Harvard University; Cambridge, MA, USA.

2National Bureau of Economic Research; Cambridge, MA, USA.
3Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

† These authors contributed equally. ∗Corresponding author: melissadell@fas.harvard.edu.

Abstract While there is a large literature on entity dis-
Massive-scale historical document collections ambiguation to a knowledge base (but to a lesser
are crucial for social science research. Despite extent, entity coreference across documents in a
increasing digitization, these documents typi- corpus), we found that existing methods did not
cally lack unique cross-document identifiers for meet our accuracy requirements when applied to
individuals mentioned within the texts, as well historical documents. Some widely-used meth-
as individual identifiers from external knowl- ods require the entity to be in the knowledge base,
edge bases like Wikipedia/Wikidata. Existing whereas historical documents are replete with indi-
entity disambiguation methods often fall short
in accuracy for historical documents, which viduals not in Wikipedia. Indeed, one motivation
are replete with individuals not remembered for disambiguating entities in historical texts is to
in contemporary knowledge bases. This study understand why some people are remembered and
makes three key contributions to improve cross- others are not. Historical texts have a different dis-
document coreference resolution and disam- tribution of entities than modern texts; for example,
biguation in historical texts: a massive-scale there may be fewer hyperlinks in crawl corpora - a
training dataset replete with hard negatives - common source of training data - to these individ-
that sources over 190 million entity pairs from uals’ Wikipedia pages. Moreover, historical texts
Wikipedia contexts and disambiguation pages -
high-quality evaluation data from hand-labeled often have OCR noise, and language can evolve
historical newswire articles, and trained models across time. To feasibly run entity disambiguation
evaluated on this historical benchmark. We con- over massive-scale historical texts, the method also
trastively train bi-encoder models for corefer- needs to be highly computationally efficient, as
encing and disambiguating individuals in histor- academic and archival budgets are typically highly
ical texts, achieving accurate, scalable perfor- constrained, and the amount of potential historical
mance that identifies out-of-knowledge base in- material to disambiguate is vast.
dividuals. Our approach significantly surpasses
other entity disambiguation models on our his- This study makes three central contributions de-
torical newswire benchmark. Our models also signed to improve and encourage further research
demonstrate competitive performance on mod- on cross-document coreference resolution and dis-
ern entity disambiguation benchmarks, particu- ambiguation of individuals in historical texts: a
larly on certain news disambiguation datasets. massive-scale training dataset replete with hard

1 Introduction negatives, high quality evaluation data drawn from
historical documents, and entity coreference and

Massive scale historical document collections - disambiguation models trained and evaluated on
such as historical newspapers or the 14 billion doc- these data.
uments in the U.S. National Archives - are cen- Our first contribution is to train coreference and
tral source materials for social science research. disambiguation models, with a focus on historical
While historical documents are increasingly be- texts, and news in particular. Our aims are: 1) ac-
ing digitized, they are not typically tagged with curate performance, 2) highly scalable, 3) allowing
unique cross-document identifiers for individuals out-of-knowledge base mentions, and 4) trainable
mentioned in the texts, or with individual iden- with simple recipes and limited compute.
tifiers from an external knowledge base such as A contrastively trained bi-encoder retrieval ar-
English Wikipedia/Wikidata, which provides struc- chitecture, widely used for open-domain retrieval
tured data for over a million individuals. (e.g., Karpukhin et al. (2020)), is an excellent fit

6174
Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6174–6186

November 12-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics



for these requirements. In a contrastively trained (e.g., with hyperlinks to John F. Kennedy’s page)
bi-encoder, the neural network encodes mentions and pair them with contexts mentioning other enti-
(in the document corpus or a knowledge base) that ties from the John Kennedy disambiguation page.
refer to the same entity nearby in embedding space We overrepresent hard negatives from within fam-
and encodes mentions referring to different enti- ilies (e.g., paired mentions of Henry Ford Jr. and
ties further apart. At inference time, a given entity Henry Ford Sr.) by mining family members from
mention is disambiguated to the nearest entry of Wikidata pages. These challenging cases are very
the knowledge base if their encodings are within common in historical texts (e.g., fathers and sons
some threshold similarity. If the mention encoding with the same name and profession). Constructing
is sufficiently dissimilar to all entries in the knowl- our open-source WikiConfusables required sub-
edge base, the entity is marked as out-of-knowledge stantial wrangling of Wikipedia dumps, and we
base. Analogously, an arbitrary number of entity have made it publicly available (CC-BY) to allow
mentions across documents in a corpus (e.g.,, dif- other researchers to more easily exploit this rich
ferent newspaper articles) can be coreferenced by source of information.
clustering their embeddings. The extensive hard negative pairs in

This approach is highly scalable because each WikiConfusables allow us to contrastively
entity mention and entry in the knowledge base is train our entity coreference and disambiguation
embedded only once, no matter how many entities models on four Nvidia A6000 GPU cards, a
are to be disambiguated. Moreover, a Facebook AI modest setup by deep learning standards. In
Similarity Search (FAISS) (Johnson et al., 2019) contrast, contrastive training with random negative
backend can be used to retrieve the most similar pairs requires massive batch sizes to achieve strong
knowledge base embedding for each mention in the performance (He et al., 2020).
document corpus. FAISS is extremely optimized, We train our LinkMentions coreference model
scaling up to billion-scale datasets on relatively on paired contexts around Wikipedia mention hy-
modest hardware. This architecture also easily han- perlinks. We further tune this coreference model
dles out-of-knowledge-base entities. Assuming an for disambiguation, creating LinkWikipedia, by
appropriate training dataset, it is straightforward training on paired contexts and first paragraphs. If
to train, making it feasible, even on a highly con- desired, this model can be further tuned on target
strained academic compute budget, to update the data. We do so for historical newspapers, creat-
models as the deep learning literature advances or ing the LinkNewsWikipedia model by tuning on a
to tune them for specific document collections. hand-labeled dataset linking individuals in newspa-

A second central contribution of the paper is pers to Wikipedia.
the creation of a massive-scale dataset for con- A third contribution is the development of a high
trastive training of entity coreference and entity quality benchmark that coreferences and disam-
disambiguation models. WikiConfusables con- biguates individuals in historical newswire arti-
structs over 190 million entity pairs for contrastive cles from the 1950s and 1960s, that appear in the
training. Positive pairs come from contexts (para- Newswire dataset (Silcock et al., 2024). We hand
graphs) in Wikipedia that contain hyperlinks to the disambiguate entities - or mark them as not in the
same page (for coreference), or from a context and knowledge base - creating the Entities of the
the first paragraph of the relevant entity that it links Union historical benchmark.
to (for disambiguation). We document performance on Entities of

We obtain hard negative entity pairs - e.g., pairs the Union that significantly exceeds that of other
that are highly confusable - at scale from Wikipedia widely used entity disambiguation models. We are
disambiguation pages, which list entities that have also competitive in disambiguating individuals in
confusable names or aliases. The hard negative modern benchmarks, especially on the MSNBC
pairs come from contexts that link to different and ACE2004 benchmarks (both of which disam-
pages on a given disambiguation page. For ex- biguate modern news), where we outperform other
ample, the disambiguation page "John Kennedy" state-of-the-art models. This suggests that our mod-
includes John F. Kennedy the president, John els and training data have broader applications be-
Kennedy (Louisiana politician), John F. Kennedy yond historical documents, especially to modern
Jr, and a variety of other John Kennedys. Hard neg- news.
atives sample contexts mentioning John F. Kennedy Cross-document coreference is moreover highly

6175



accurate. Cross-document coreference resolution 2018) bi-encoder and a re-ranking cross-encoder.
is often central to cataloging historical document The model assumes all entities are in the knowledge
collections, and can be applied as a first step to base. This study updates the bi-encoder architec-
creating a knowledge base when the individuals ture with advances made over the past five years
in a corpus are not covered in existing knowledge (such as using mean pooling rather than a [CLS] to-
bases. ken for the representation (Reimers and Gurevych,

Finally, we briefly illustrate some of the facts 2019) and advances in training efficiency). It also
that can be gleaned from tagging unique individuals develops an expansive training dataset, replete with
in historical document collections, by applying the hard negatives. We develop a coreference model
LinkNewsWikipedia model to a large-scale histor- and incorporate it into the disambiguation pipeline
ical news dataset. We are enthusiastic about the and allow for out-of-knowledge base individuals.
promise of coreferenced and disambiguated histori- Another well-known model that uses a bi-
cal documents to lead to many informative insights. encoder is ReFinED (Ayoola et al., 2022), an en-
Our datasets and models are open-source, with a tity linking model that performs mention detection
CC-BY license, and we hope that they encourage and disambiguation for all mentions within a doc-
further engagement with historical cross-document ument in a single pass. Like BLINK, it uses a bi-
coreference resolution and disambiguation. encoder architecture but allows entities to be out-of-

The rest of this study is organized as fol- knowledge base. This study compares the perfor-
lows: Section 2 discusses the related literature, mance of our models to GENRE, BLINK, and Re-
and Section 3 introduces the novel massive scale FinED, widely-used models with well-maintained
WikiConfusables training dataset and historical codebases.
benchmark. Section 4 develops models for en- The cross-document coreference resolution liter-
tity coreference and disambiguation, and Section ature is less dense, but a closely related study is Hsu
5 evaluates model performance. Section 6 applies and Horwood (2022), which uses a contrastively
our models to a massive-scale historical news cor- trained RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) bi-encoder and
pus. Finally, Section 8 considers limitations, and clustering for cross-document resolution of entities
Section 9 discusses ethical considerations. and events. They do not consider disambiguation

to an external knowledge base.
2 Literature A key distinction between this study and most

existing entity disambiguation benchmarks is its
Entity disambiguation has inspired a variety of ar- focus on real-world contexts with lesser known en-
chitectures, including a masked language model tities - many lost to history except in the contexts of
(LUKE) (Yamada et al., 2022) and a neural transla- the documents being considered. Most benchmarks
tion model (GENRE) (De Cao et al., 2020). While only contain in-knowledge base entities. An excep-
these architectures work well for some problems, tion is Kassner et al. (2022). They detect out-of-
they are not well-suited for disambiguation of large- knowledge base mentions by clustering representa-
scale historical corpora. The masked language tions, with a cluster defined as out-of-knowledge
model approach limits to the top 50K Wikipedia base if there are no Wikipedia embeddings in the
entries, many of whom are not people, due to com- cluster. They then add the mean embeddings of
putational constraints in computing the softmax. It the out-of-knowledge base clusters to the knowl-
also does not allow out-of-knowledge base entities edge base index and run entity linking with this
and requires sparse entity priors. The neural transla- fully comprehensive embedding index. They use
tion approach’s sequence-to-sequence architecture BLINK as the encoder. To create a dataset with
is slow at inference time, requiring around 60 times out-of-knowledge base entities, they link a large
longer to run than other models considered in our crawl corpus (OSCAR) to two Wikipedia dumps
comparisons. taken at time t0 and t1. Links to pages added be-

This paper follows the most scalable entity dis- tween t0 and t1 are then out of knowledge base
ambiguation approaches in employing a bi-encoder when disambiguating to the knowledge base in t0.
architecture. One of the inspirations for the current This type of out-of-knowledge base entity is dif-
study is BLINK (Wu et al., 2019), which models ferent to the type we encounter in historical texts,
entity disambiguation as a text retrieval problem, as they are entities that were prominent enough at
using a contrastively trained BERT (Devlin et al., the time of mention to link to Wikipedia but are

6176



not in an earlier snapshot. In contrast, in historical President Kennedy, John Fitzgerald Kennedy, J.
applications, many individuals are simply not very F. Kennedy, JFK, John Kennedy, John Fitzgerald
prominent. We do not compare on this benchmark, ‘Jack’ Kennedy, and JF Kennedy. Has worked as
as all these entities were in the late-2022 Wikipedia a politician, journalist, and statesperson." We then
snapshot we used for training. Hence, they were append this text with the first paragraph of the as-
seen in training by our models (but not by some of sociated Wikipedia page.
the older comparisons) and no longer approximate Easy negatives are created by linking contexts
truly out-of-knowledge base entities. We do not with random entity templates. Similar to our
compare on the dataset introduced by Zaporojets coreference training, we use Wikipedia disam-
et al. (2022) for similar reasons. biguation pages to associate entity contexts with

hard negative templates. We also create negative
3 Datasets pairs using family relationships in Wikidata - e.g.,
3.1 Training Data John F. Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy Onas-

sis (who could often be referred to as "Mrs. John
High-quality hard negatives, as well as paired posi- Kennedy"). We split the entities into an 80-10-10
tive data, are needed to train contrastive models train-validation-test split.
for entity coreference and disambiguation. We
create a novel, massive-scale training dataset - Finally, we further adapt the training domain

to newspapers. An advantage of our bi-encoder
WikiConfusables - by mining entity pairs from

architecture is that it is straightforward to tune to
Wikipedia disambiguation pages and Wikidata fam- specific domains, plausibly helpful given historical
ily relationships. document collections can be quite idiosyncratic.

Entity contexts are drawn from a Wikipedia
We prepare a hand-labeled dataset,

XML dump1 from November 11, 2022, with men-
NewsConfusables, to tune our LinkWikipedia

tions of each entity appearing as a hyperlink to
model to the historical news domain. First, we

their page. We split the entities into train, test, and
obtain names and aliases of individuals from

validation sets, pairing mentions of the same entity
Wikidata, then do a sparse search for them in a

along with their context (defined by the paragraph
newspaper corpus spanning a century. We hand

containing the entity mention) to create positive
label whether the article refers to the anchor (e.g.,

pairs. We create ‘easy negatives’ by pairing an
John F. Kennedy) or someone with the same name

entity mention with that of a different entity. We
or alias (e.g., City Councilman Jack Kennedy).

obtain ‘hard’ negatives using Wikipedia’s disam-
When they refer to different individuals, these form

biguation pages, e.g., John Fitzgerald Kennedy and
hard negatives. We create extra hard negatives by

John Kennedy (Louisiana senator). We further en-
matching an individual with another individual

hance our training data with in-context negatives,
mentioned in the same context, and Wikipedia hard

other entities that appear in the context window of
negatives by matching an individual with another

the entity under consideration. Table 1 describes
individual mentioned in the same Wikipedia

the resulting dataset.
disambiguation dictionary. Easy negatives are

Train Val Test created by matching with a random individual.
Wiki Coreference 179,069,981 5,819,525 5,132,56 Further information on this labeling process is
Wiki Disambiguation 4,202,145 522,385 528,709 given in the supplementary materials.
NewsConfusables 5046 666 666

Table 1: Statistics on dataset size. 3.2 Evaluation Data
An important contribution of the study is to create

We also create data for disambiguation by link- high quality evaluation data for entity coreference
ing contexts with entity mentions to their associated resolution and disambiguation with historical docu-
template, forming positive pairs. To create the tem- ments. Our Entities of the Union benchmark
plate, we use Wikidata names, aliases, and occupa- labels historical, off-copyright U.S. newswire ar-
tions/positions held by individuals. For example, ticles (Silcock et al., 2024). We double label 157
for President Kennedy: "John F. Kennedy is of type newswire articles, from 4 different days from 4
human. Also known as Kennedy, Jack Kennedy, years in the 1950s and 60s, totaling 1,137 person

1https://dumps.wikimedia.org/ mentions. The articles were labeled by highly moti-
6177



vated North American undergraduate students2 and propagate. Separating named entity recognition
all discrepancies were resolved by hand. We label and coreference/disambiguation simplifies the ar-
days on which State of the Union addresses took chitecture, making it easier for the social science
place, as there are modestly more coreferences to community to implement or customize to individu-
resolve, providing more power for evaluating this alized applications.
task. We moreover focus on [PER] (person) tags from

We split Entities of the Union into a 50-50 named entity recognition, as these are of primary
evaluation-test split, so the coreference clustering interest for many historical applications. We found
threshold can be chosen on the val split. Table 2 that locations could be disambiguated very well
compares the size of the Entities of the Union using non-neural methods and Geonames, a larger
test split to other widely-used modern benchmarks structured database of georeferenced locations.
for entity disambiguation. Coreference Resolution Model: Our corefer-

ence resolution model links mentions of a given
Benchmark Total Mentions in People People in

Mentions Wikipedia Mentions Wikipedia person across documents in a corpus. Depending
AIDA-CoNLL (test) 1,824 1,824 248 248 on the question at hand, coreference resolution can
ACE2004 257 257 20 20 produce the final output or can be used to create a
AQAINT 727 727 64 64
MSNBC 656 656 228 228 prototype entity for disambiguation to an external
WNED-WIKI 6,821 6,821 625 625 knowledge base.
WNED-CWEB 11,154 11,154 1,361 1,361
EotU (test) 569 446 569 446 We choose a bi-encoder infrastructure, as bi-

encoders are relatively straightforward for re-
Table 2: Entity and people mentions across different searchers with limited exposure to deep learning
benchmarks. to customize to novel settings. This is essential for

academic applications, which tend to be highly di-
Note that our full dataset is twice the size of the verse and hence often require customization. They

test set described here. The larger WNED datasets train with relatively little supervised data and fine-
are generated automatically from web texts - e.g., tuning is not very sensitive to hyperparameter se-
using links from elsewhere on the web to Wikipedia lection. Training a bi-encoder is feasible on a small
- and hence are more akin to WikiConfusables. compute budget. Pre-trained bi-encoder models are

Note that these widely used-benchmarks have lightweight and offer efficient inference for large
all entities in the knowledge base. In Entities datasets. Other popular architectures often have
of the Union (validation and test splits), there limitations on the size of the knowledge base that
are 220 unique individuals that are in Wikipedia, can be used, cannot handle out-of-knowledge base
totaling 898 mentions. There are 239 mentions that entities, or are very slow to run. Out-of-knowledge
are not in Wikipedia. base entities and a large set of potential entities to
4 Methods disambiguate to are particularly common in histori-

cal applications. Finally, bi-encoders are easily im-
LinkMentions and LinkWikipedia coreference plementable using the sentence transformers pack-
mentions across documents in a corpus and dis- age, which continues to have an active user com-
ambiguate person mentions to a knowledge base, munity. This will hopefully add to the longevity of
respectively. An overview of the model architec- a bi-encoder approach to disambiguation.
ture is shown in Figure 1. To contrastively train LinkMentions, using the

We separate named entity recognition - which 179,069,981 coreference training pairs in our novel
tags the tokens in a text that refer to named enti- WikiConfusables coreference training set, we em-
ties - from entity disambiguation, rather than do- ploy Online Contrastive Loss as implemented in
ing them end-to-end as in entity linking. Even Reimers and Gurevych (2019), with cosine simi-
in noisy historical news articles, we are able to larity and margin of 0.4, and utilize AdamW as
achieve 94% accuracy tagging people with named the optimizer with a linear warm up scheduler set
entity recognition as a token classification task. Er- to 18.2%. Our training setup includes 4 Nvidia
rors tend to occur when OCR noise is so severe A6000 GPUs, a batch size of 512, and a learning
that there is little hope of disambiguating the en- rate of 1e-5. We train for a single epoch, processing
tity. Hence, there is not much scope for errors to each pair in the training split only once. The best

2They were paid at the rate set by our department. model is chosen based on the pair-wise classifica-
6178



Figure 1: Entity Disambiguation Pipeline. Newspaper articles with pre-identified entities are embedded using
LinkMentions and then clustered to group mentions of the same entity. Templates constructed from Wikidata and
Wikipedia are then embedded using the LinkNewsWikipedia to create a lookup FAISS index. The news articles
corresponding to the same cluster are embedded using LinkNewsWikipedia and mean-pooled to create a prototype
embedding to query the lookup index. The entity of the nearest Wikipedia template to the query is assigned to each
article in the entity cluster.

tion F1 score on the validation set, with the highest LinkMentions is used to embed the mentions, and
validation F1 being 92.75%. then they are grouped together via hierarchical ag-

We use a sequence length of 256, and initialize glomerative clustering (with average linkage) using
with an all-mpnet-base-v2 Sentence-BERT model cosine similarity. A threshold of 0.175 was chosen
(Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) from the Hugging on the validation set. (Other clustering methods
Face hub. This is a lightweight model, making it are straightforward to swap in, as desired.) In the
more feasible for those in the academic community newspaper corpus, we coreference entities across
with limited resources to train and deploy it at scale. articles within dates.
The model is trained in Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019) Disambiguation: For disambiguation, we fine-
with hyperparameters tuned using hyperband im- tune our coreference model on the disambiguation
plemented in Weights and Biases (Weights&Biases, portion of WikiConfusables, with similar hyper-
2023). Given the large training dataset, we found it parameters to those used in coreference training,
beneficial to divide it into 10 chunks before training. but without restarts or chunking. The learning rate
After completing each chunk (1/10 of an epoch), is 2e-6, with a 20% warm up, and batch size is 256.
we resumed training from an intermediate check- The model is trained for three epochs, and the best
point and lowered the learning rate to 2e-6 after checkpoint is selected based on the classification
the first chunk to minimize the risk of the opti- F1, achieving a maximum validation F1 of 97%.
mizer overshooting the minima. Since training This model can be further tuned for specific
each chunk began with a warm up, our approach ef- applications. We create LinkNewsWikipedia
fectively simulates a linear scheduler with restarts. by tuning on the paired disambiguation data in

We observed significant performance improve- NewsConfusables. We use an identical training
ment by using special tokens ([M ] Entity [\M ]) setup, achieving a maximum validation F1 of 85%.
around an entity mention (Wu et al., 2019). For Next, we prepare a lookup corpus to disam-
instance, "Eisenhower sharing a light moment with biguate entity mentions to the correct entity us-
President-elect [M ] John F. Kennedy [\M ] during ing semantic information from both the context
their meeting in the Oval Office." around the mention and information from a tem-

At inference time, the contrastively trained plate we create from Wikipedia and Wikidata pages
6179



of individuals, as described above. We prune our training a cross-encoder on WikiConfusables
knowledge base to remove extraneous entities. We would be straightforward.
include only entities of instance type human, who For reproducibility and ease of access, we have
have a birth or death date, as we found most that did made our models and training/evaluation data avail-
not were instance type errors. We remove pages of able on the Hugging Face hub (links are redacted
individuals born after the conclusion of the corpus to maintain anonymity for review). All code is in
and remove entities with no overlap and a high edit our GitHub repository.
distance between the Wikidata label and the asso-
ciated Wikipedia page title. We found that those 5 Evaluation
pages overwhelmingly were not a person page for
that Wikidata entry. To measure performance on coreferencing and dis-

The resulting knowledge base has 1.12 million ambiguating individuals in historical documents,
person pages. We embed these templates using our we apply our models and others from the literature
disambiguation model and store them in a FAISS to Entities of the Union. We made significant
IndexFlatIP index (Johnson et al., 2019). efforts to run existing models on our evaluation

To run disambiguation, we embed mentions us- data, but not all models in the literature have main-
ing the disambiguation model. Using the clusters tained their codebases, or even made code available.
obtained from coreferencing, we mean pool within Moreover, some models are simply not suitable
each cluster to create the entity prototype embed- for the task. For example, LUKE (Yamada et al.,
dings, and use these to query the nearest neigh- 2019) limits to top 50K Wikipedia entities (many
bor(s) in the knowledge base. If there is no em- of whom are not people), meaning relatively few
bedding in the knowledge base within a threshold entities in our datasets are in the knowledge base.
cosine similarity of the query - where this threshold We run BLINK (Wu et al., 2019), GENRE (De Cao
is chosen on a validation set - we mark the entity et al., 2020), and ReFinED (Ayoola et al., 2022), all
as not in the knowledge base. prominent models in the entity disambiguation liter-

To choose the no-match threshold, we annotate ature with well-maintained codebases. We closely
the output of our disambiguation pipeline on a set follow their implementations, providing details in
of 6,425 pairs sampled from 13 years in a large- the supplementary materials. The latter two mod-
scale newswire dataset (Silcock et al., 2024). We els have a zero-shot version and an AIDA-CoNLL
then find the cut-off threshold that maximizes pair- fine-tuned version. We report results for both.
wise classification precision and use it as the no- These are disambiguation, not coreference, mod-
match threshold. We chose a threshold of 0.14986. els. The coreference literature is thinner and dis-

If the returned matches are very close to each ambiguation is our main focus, and so we do not

other, we find there are modest gains from dis- have comparisons for this task. Coreferencing in-

ambiguating to the most popular near entity. If dividuals across newswire articles is very accurate,

the nearest neighbor is within the no-match thresh- achieving an adjusted rand index (ARI) of 96.42.

old distance for a match, and the second-nearest Table 3 documents that on the Entities of the

neighbor is at least 0.01 cosine distance from the Union dataset, both our zero-shot LinkWikipedia
nearest neighbor, we disambiguate to the nearest model and fine-tuned LinkNewsWikipedia

neighbor. Otherwise, we use Qrank3, which ranks model beat other models by a wide margin.
Wikidata entities by aggregating page views on LinkNewsWikipedia correctly retrieves or
Wikipedia, Wikispecies, Wikibooks, Wikiquote, classifies as out-of-knowledge base 78% of
and other Wikimedia projects. We keep all entities individual mentions, whereas LinkWikipedia has
that are within 0.01 cosine distance of the nearest an accuracy of 74%. The next best alternative is
neighbor to the query, and choose the one with the ReFinED, which correctly disambiguates around
highest Qrank. 65% of mentions. When only considering entities

We do not add a re-ranking step with a cross- in Wikipedia, LinkNewsWikipedia correctly

encoder, as in Wu et al. (2019), in order to maxi- disambiguates 89% of entities, LinkWikipedia

mize scaleability to massive datasets. However, correctly disambiguates 85% of entities, and the
next best alternative is GENRE, with an accuracy

3https://github.com/brawer/wikidata-qrank/ of 81%. Hence, while much of the advantage is
tree/main with out-of-knowledge base entities, our models

6180



Benchmark LinkWikipedia LinkNewsWikipedia BLINK GENRE GENRE ReFinED ReFinED
BLINK Data AIDA-CoNLL Base AIDA-CoNLL

EotU (all) 74.0 78.3 59.9 63.4 62.4 65.4 64.0
EotU (in KB) 85.2 89.0 76.5 80.9 79.6 60.3 59.9
AIDA-CoNLL (test set) 70.6 71.7 79.0 58.1 62.1 99.2 99.2
ACE2004 90.0 90.0 85.0 80.0 80.0 80.0 80.0
AQAINT 92.2 95.3 98.4 95.3 95.3 93.8 93.8
MSNBC 89.4 98.2 81.6 82.5 84.2 84.2 82.9
WNED-WIKI 88.9 88.5 93.9 94.2 93.4 95.5 94.7
WNED-CWEB 70.7 71.5 69.1 70.7 71.5 73.3 72.4

Table 3: Benchmark performance comparison across different methods. The first row evaluates on all entities in
Entities of the Union, whereas the second row only considers in-knowledge base entities.

also do better on in-knowledge base entities, even tering entities in the knowledge base to be born
zero-shot. prior to the end date of the corpus and re-ranking

We also compare performance on disambiguat- by Wikipedia QRank when the nearest entities are
ing people in existing, widely-used benchmarks. very close to each other. Accuracy falls relative
While modern data are not our main focus, to the baseline by around ten percentage points
our models do reasonably well. In particular, in both models. Adding coreference resolution
LinkNewsWikipedia achieves a near-perfect 98% restores almost all of this decline, with birthdate
accuracy on MSNBC. LinkWikipedia has 89% filtering and Qrank re-ranking contributing little.
accuracy, as compared to the next best (GENRE) Coreference resolution plausibly combines infor-
with 84% accuracy. This suggests that our mod- mation across mentions and reduces noise, leading
els - beyond being suited to historical applications to overall better quality disambiguation.
- can also be well-suited to disambiguating mod-
ern news. We also beat other models on the news 6 Exploring Entities in Historical News
dataset ACE2004, which has very few people. On
other modern benchmarks, there are model(s) that To give a flavor of how our framework can be com-
perform better, but our performance is in the range bined with historical documents, we apply our dis-
of the other models. ambiguation pipeline to a large-scale corpus of his-

torical newswire articles - sent out over newswires
Model Base Our Model Add Add Birth Add Qrank such as the Associated Press between 1878 and

MPNet Only Disambig. Coref. Date Filter Rerank 1977 (Silcock et al., 2024). The dataset contains
LinkWikipedia 26.5 62.6 73.8 73.8 74.0
NewsLinkWikipedia 26.5 69.1 77.9 77.9 78.3 2.7 million unique articles, reproduced in a corpus

of local news over 32 million times.
Table 4: Ablations. The first column uses a Sentence-
BERT MPNet model, which we use to initialize training. We disambiguate 15,323,463 person mentions,
The second column discards the coreferencing step, as encompassing 61,933 unique individuals. Only
well as birthdate filtering and Qrank re-ranking. The 4.6% of disambiguated entity mentions refer to
next three columns add back coreference resolution, women, with Golda Meir being the most mentioned
birthdate filtering, and Qrank re-ranking, respectively. woman. The most mentioned entity is Dwight

D. Eisenhower, appearing in 9,530 unique articles
We conduct ablations in Table 4, to quantify the which are reproduced an average of 33.7 times.

contributions of different elements in our disam- Richard Nixon, Harry S. Truman, and Adolf Hitler
biguation pipeline. Base MPNet disambiguates are the next most mentioned in unique newswire
with a Sentence-BERT (Reimers and Gurevych, articles. Figure 2 plots their mention counts. For
2019) MPNet (Song et al., 2020) model (all-mpnet- U.S. presidents, electoral cycles are clearly visible.
base-v2), the base model that we initialize with. Entity disambiguation also allows us to see in-
This model is not intended for entity disambigua- dividuals’ occupations in Wikidata. The most
tion, but we include it to quantify how much is common occupations of disambiguated entities are
gained through our training. Performance is very politician, military officer and lawyer.
poor. The next column reports results from our This dataset, also publicly available, provides
trained disambiguation models, without corefer- fascinating data that researchers can use to study
ence resolution or additional processing steps: fil- who appeared in historical news and which of these

6181



ence and disambiguation, while our models provide
an off-the-shelf solution for social scientists want-
ing to explore who is mentioned in historical texts.

8 Limitations
The present paper focuses on individuals and dis-
ambiguation to Wikipedia/Wikidata. We found dis-
ambiguating locations to Wikipedia to be unproduc-
tive, as we could achieve very strong performance
using sparse methods and Geonames, a more com-
prehensive database of locations. In the future, we
hope to extend the model to organizations (though

Figure 2: Mentions over time of entities that appeared in practice, many historical organizations end up
most commonly in newswire articles. being out-of-knowledge base).

While Wikipedia is extensive, there are many
people who never entered this knowledge base,
and various biases may influence which histori-
cal figures are remembered in Wikipedia. Part of
the objective of applying LinkNewsWikipedia to
a massive scale corpus of historical newswires is to
understand more about which individuals were con-
sidered broadly newsworthy at the time but have
since been forgotten. This information could be
used to expand databases such as Wikipedia in the
future. Nevertheless, we cannot disambiguate an

Figure 3: Mentions against Wikipedia Qrank. individual who is not in the knowledge base, no
matter how noteworthy they were historically.

individuals are remembered via Wikipedia today. 9 Ethical Considerations
To examine whether we are able to detect less

prominent entities as well as prominent entities, This study presents no major ethical concerns. Its
we plot log mentions by decile in the large scale methods are entirely open source, and its training
newswire dataset (Silcock et al., 2024) - a measure data are entirely in the public domain. We disam-
of how prominent individuals were in the news his- biguate individuals in widely reproduced historical
torically - against log Wikidata Qrank by decile, newspaper articles, which are in the public domain
showing the correlation between these two mea- and hence do not pose privacy concerns.
sures. It is possible that some applications could raise

We find a virtually linear relationship, showing concerns. Historical news, government publica-
that we do not underdetect less prominent entities, tions, and other historical documents reflect the
or overdetect prominent entities. biases of their time and may contain factual in-

accuracies or offensive content. Moreover, while
7 Conclusion our models are reasonably accurate, they are not
We provide new data for training and evaluat- perfect, and depending on the usage of the output,
ing entity coreference and disambiguation. We human revision of the match - potentially bringing
propose bi-encoder models trained on this data, in additional information - may be required. It is
which achieve high accuracy for disambiguating important to interpret the disambiguated texts criti-
and coreferencing entities in historical documents, cally, as is the norm in rigorous historical research.
as well as on existing entity disambiguation bench- Acknowledgements
marks. Our models are able to handle out-of-
knowledge base individuals. We received excellent research assistance from

Our data provide high-quality resources for other Arpit Bhate, Vania Cheung, William Cox, Den-
researchers developing methods for entity corefer- nis Du, Eyad Elsafoury, Connor Fogal, Jude Ha,

6182



Zachary Lee, Alice Liu, Catherine Liu, Shiloh Liu,
Andrew Lu, Omer Mujawar, Sethu Odayappan,
Domenick Regina, Cristopher Rosas, and Ryan
Xia. Harvard Data Science Initiative and Microsoft
Azure provided compute credits to support article
digitization.

6183



Supplemental Materials
10 Model hyperparameters

10.1 Entity coreference
At training time, we split the large training set into
10 chunks and we use the following hyperparame-
ters:

• Online contrastive loss, with cosine distance
metric and a margin of 0.4 Figure 4: Sensitivity of disambiguation results to choice

of coreference clustering threshold.
• Batch size: 256

• Max sequence length: 256

• Epochs: 1

• Learning rate 1e-5, increased to 2e-06 after
first chunk

• Optimiser: AdamW

• Warm-up rate: 0.182, increased to 1 after the Figure 5: Sensitivity of disambiguation results to choice
first chunk of no-match threshold.

At inference time, we cluster entities using Hi- 10.3 Sensitivity to inference hyperparameters
erarchical Agglomerative clustering, with average
linking and cosine distance metric, with a thresh- The two main hyperparameters at inference time
old of 0.175, which was validated on the validation are the clustering threshold used in the coreference
split. step, and the no-match threshold used in the dis-

ambiguation step. In figure 4 in the main text, we
10.2 Entity disambiguation demonstrate that our results are not particularly

sensitive to other choices.
At training time we use the following hyperparam- Here we examine sensitivity of our results
eters: to choices of clustering threshold and no-match

threshold, with our fine-tuned disambiguation
• Online contrastive loss, with cosine distance model.

metric and a margin of 0.4 Figure 4 graphs the disambiguation accuracy on
the test set of Entities of the Union for differ-

• Batch size: 256 ent choices of clustering threshold. The results are
quite flat around the threshold that we chose, based

• Max sequence length: 256 on the validation set.
Figure 4 shows sensitivity of these same results

• Epochs: 3 to choice of no-match threshold. The results are not
especially sensitive. The threshold can be changed

• Learning rate 2e-6 ±2 percentage points with little change to the re-
sults. In fact, we can see here that the threshold

• Optimiser: AdamW that we chose was not in fact the optimal threshold,
but this makes minimal difference to our overall

• Warm-up rate: 0.2 results.
6184



11 Comparison to other entity detail about the person, including information
disambiguation models on positions they’ve held, what else they’ve

done etc. Most of these people also appear on
We compare our method against existing entity Wikipedia, so this is also a good source for
disambiguation architectures. Results from this are finding out more info about the person.
given in the text. Details of the implementations of
other architectures follow. • Then there are (up to) 32 passages of text.

In each of these there is a highlighted term.
11.1 BLINK Your job is to label each of these passages for
To run BLINK (Wu et al., 2019), we use the im- whether the highlighted term is the same as
plementation from their github repository directly the person in the box at the top (‘positive’) or
(https://github.com/facebookresearch/ not (‘negative’). In some cases this will be
BLINK). Specifically we use main_dense.run() pretty clear, and in some cases it might need a
with default hyperparameters. bit of digging.

11.2 GENRE • In some cases we don’t have 32 passages, so
you’ll see some turn up as "Empty" at the end

For GENRE (De Cao et al., 2020), we - no need to label these ”
used their huggingface implementation
(https://huggingface.co/facebook/ 12.2 Entities of the Union annotator
genre-linking-blink). We used 10 beams, with instructions
truncation around the entities to a max token To create Entities of the Union, 1,137 entity
length of 384 as suggested in the appendix of the mentions across 157 newswire articles were double-
original paper. Otherwise default hyperparameters annotated by undergraduate research assistants. An-
were used. We evaluate using both their base notator labeling instructions were as follows:
model (facebook/genre-linking-blink) and “We’ve pulled out lots of articles from the day
their model finetuned on Aida-YAGO. of the State of the Union speech in 1958, 1959,

1960 and 1961. A team of RAs over this semester
11.3 ReFinED has been labeling the spans in these texts that re-
To evaluate ReFinED, we use entity disambigua- fer to an entity. What we want you to focus on is
tion implementation from their github repos- working out which unique entity these spans refer
itory (https://github.com/amazon-science/ to. The database of unique identifiers that we will
ReFinED). We use refined.process_text() work from is Wikidata (https://www.wikidata.org/).
with default hyperparameters. For each mention, If you search for entities on here, you will see
we specify that the mention type is PER using they have a unique identifier beginning with Q (eg.
coarse_mention_type = "PERSON". Melissa’s is Q58009782 ). For each entity in the

articles we’d like you to find the unique identifier in
12 Annotator instructions wikidata (if it exists). It might also be useful to use
12.1 wikipedia in difficult cases - all pages on wikipedia

NewsConfusables annotator instructions
will have an entry in wikidata, but wikidata is big-

NewsConfusables was labeled by The articles ger than wikipedia, so there might be some entities
were labeled by paid North American undergradu- in wikidata that you don’t find in wikipedia [...]
ate students. Annotators were given the following there’s 14 entities to label on average per article.
instructions: The entity in question should be highlighted in the

text.”
• “The box at the top shows the entity in ques- Annotators were encouraged to reach out with

tion, the years in which they held some kind questions and clarifications.
of important position, and their aliases (see
more detail at the end of this email).

References
• It also shows a code starting with Q. This

is the unique reference for the person in Tom Ayoola, Shubhi Tyagi, Joseph Fisher, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Andrea Pierleoni. 2022. Re-

Wikidata. You can query search this there FinED: An efficient zero-shot-capable approach to
(https://www.wikidata.org/) and pull up more end-to-end entity linking. In NAACL.

6185



Nicola De Cao, Gautier Izacard, Sebastian Riedel, and Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:16857–
Fabio Petroni. 2020. Autoregressive entity retrieval. 16867.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.00904.

Weights&Biases. 2023. Tune hyperparameters.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and

Kristina Toutanova. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep Ledell Wu, Fabio Petroni, Martin Josifoski, Sebastian
bidirectional transformers for language understand- Riedel, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2019. Scalable zero-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805. shot entity linking with dense entity retrieval. arXiv

preprint arXiv:1911.03814.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and

Ross Girshick. 2020. Momentum contrast for unsu- Ikuya Yamada, Koki Washio, Hiroyuki Shindo, and Yuji
pervised visual representation learning. In Proceed- Matsumoto. 2019. Global entity disambiguation with
ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision pretrained contextualized embeddings of words and
and pattern recognition, pages 9729–9738. entities. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00426.

Benjamin Hsu and Graham Horwood. 2022. Contrastive Ikuya Yamada, Koki Washio, Hiroyuki Shindo, and
representation learning for cross-document corefer- Yuji Matsumoto. 2022. Global entity disambiguation
ence resolution of events and entities. arXiv preprint with bert. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
arXiv:2205.11438. of the North American Chapter of the Association

for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. 2019. Technologies, pages 3264–3271.

Billion-scale similarity search with gpus. IEEE
Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547. Klim Zaporojets, Lucie-Aimée Kaffee, Johannes Deleu,

Thomas Demeester, Chris Develder, and Isabelle Au-
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick genstein. 2022. Tempel: Linking dynamically evolv-

Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and ing and newly emerging entities. In Thirty-sixth Con-
Wen-tau Yih. 2020. Dense passage retrieval for ference on Neural Information Processing Systems
open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
arXiv:2004.04906.

Nora Kassner, Fabio Petroni, Mikhail Plekhanov, Se-
bastian Riedel, and Nicola Cancedda. 2022. Edin:
An end-to-end benchmark and pipeline for unknown
entity discovery and indexing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.12570.

Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam
Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Te-
jani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang,
Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch:
An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 32, pages 8024–8035. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc.

Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-bert:
Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084.

Emily Silcock, Abhishek Arora, Luca D’Amico-Wong,
and Melissa Dell. 2024. Newswire: A large-scale
structured database of a century of historical news.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09490.

Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Jianfeng Lu, and Tie-
Yan Liu. 2020. Mpnet: Masked and permuted pre-
training for language understanding. Advances in

6186